A case or in this video we're going to take a look at what normalization actually is.
So normalization is the process of efficiently organizing data in a database.
And what do we want to do this.
What we want to do this to eliminate redundant data so we don't want to be storing repeated rows of
data in a table.
And we also don't want to be storing the same data in different tables and we only want to store related
data in a single table.
So for example if we had order and customer details in one single table it's actually better to split
this into two or multiple tables rather than storing this unrelated data in a single table.
So here's an example of a table which hasn't been normalized properly.
So it's a student table and we have the student name the year they're in classes they attend and also
the class is teacher.
So you can see here straightaway that every time we entered geography as students class we also have
to enter the same value for the teacher so we're repeating data here every time we enter class joke.
We also have to enter teacher Mr. Green or every time we have to enter physics we have to enter teacher
Mrs. Einstein.
So we have data redundancy in this table.
So to actually be better to split this table into to have a student table with the student name year
in class and then have a second table for the teacher which would have the teacher's name and the class
they teach.
So that's an example of how you could reduce data redundancy and normalize this table.
So what are the benefits of normalizing your database.
Well the first benefit is that you're reducing the storage space that your database needs.
Obviously it takes space to store any data.
And if you're reducing redundant data you're also reducing the overall storage space that your database
needs.
A second benefit is that you would use the insert update and deletion anomalies.
And basically what this means is you're reducing any errors that could occur when you're inserting updating
or deleting data from your database.
So an example of an anomaly would be in the previous table we had the class and the teacher.
So every time we have to insert the class we also have to insert the teacher.
So in effect we're doubling the amount of data we need to insert in one query.
And this obviously increases the chances of an era of someone making a mistake when they're inserting
class or teacher into this table.
So normalizing this table would reduce the chances of an arrow and an example of an update and deletion
or normally would be if you had the same data in multiple tables.
So for example if you were storing the teacher's home address in multiple tables so you had let's say
you have three tables which stored the teacher's home address.
If they were to move address you would have to update this address in three separate tables or if they
left school you'd have to delete that information in three separate tables as well.
So obviously if you could normalize this data and have the address stored in just one table you would
only have to do one day or one daily.
So you would reduce the chances of an era when you were updating or deleting this data from the database.
And another benefit is that it actually improves query performance.
So not only does it improve the query performance for inserting updating and deleting data into tables
it also improves retrieving data from the database so selecting from tables is the performance is actually
improved as well.
Now there are different levels of normalization which a database can be in and each level has a set
of rules that the tables must adhere to to be in the normal form.
So the first level of normalization is first of all and then second normal form third normal form and
then there's higher levels of normalization So there's the Boysen quote normal form which is sometimes
called forth normal form.
And then there's even fear for sick normal form.
But in this section we're just going to be looking first second and third normal form and 90 percent
of the time.
If your data is in normal form this is a high enough level of normalization.
Most of databases you encounter in real life we'll be in third normal form.
So in the next couple of videos we're going to be looking at the rules for the first second and third
normal form and we're going to be looking at examples of each.
So let's get started with looking at the first normal form.